[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome to a
"World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft.
And you're about
to take a journey
of self discovery with
a very special woman,
a woman with grace and charm,
warmth and love, a woman
who has made a difference
in the lives of thousands
through walking her talk and
sharing her incredible journey.
Liliane Desjardins is
a counselor, a teacher,
and a role model.
And she is here to reveal
to us that which already
exists within ourselves.
You are about to be changed.
Welcome, Liliane Desjardins.
Thanks for being here.
>> Thank you, Carolyn.
Thank you for having me.
It's really a pleasure.
I'm so excited about what
you guys are doing here.
>> Yeah.
I didn't mention,
even in the beginning,
but you are co-founder,
with your husband, Jill,
of Pavillon International, a
spiritual renewal and treatment
center.
And maybe we could
begin with how--
you know, the wake-up
call for yourself
and how it began for you.
>> Well, it was a
journey of pain.
In a nutshell, I was born at the
beginning of the Second World
War, in what used
to be Yugoslavia,
but it's Zagreb, Croatia.
And I have been witness all
my life to a lot of pain.
>> Yeah.
>> Very acutely aware of what
is going on in the world.
Later, I went to
Paris, France-- that's
where I was raised
and educated--
and then came to Canada.
The big wake-up call in
my life were addictions.
I come from a background
where addictions were present
but never really identified.
>> Sort of accepted,
weren't they?
>> Just-- that's right.
And there is so much talk
today about addiction.
To me, addiction--
and at the Pavillon,
the way that we
view them, really,
are stuck energy and attachments
that produce non-growth.
And that was also, in my case,
in my personal case, the story.
But I guess the biggest
wake-up call that came
was when my first husband died
of addiction at the age of 40.
That made it personal.
That made it real.
It made it totally different.
That's when I decided
that my life was
going to be dedicated not
just to getting better,
not just to recover
from addictions.
But it's going to be
dedicated to transformation,
because that's what I really
believed that this thing is all
about.
And addictions are wake-up
calls that do get us
to a much deeper place.
That it was a walk of pain, that
it was a walk of inner turmoil.
But you know, when I
look back, each of them
was an incredible stepping
stone for some greater strength,
some greater and deeper and
more profound wisdom to wake up.
>> Did you ever give up?
And was there a place that it--
>> Oh, yes, I did.
I--
>> More than once?
>> I gave up a few times.
But I especially gave up once,
in one of those famous suicides
that ended up in a life
after death experience,
and made all the difference
in the world for me.
Giving up is such
a fabulous concept.
You know, we give up,
but we don't give up.
Surrender is an
incredible process.
>> We think we're surrendering
sometimes, and we're--
>> That's right.
And when we are
babies, I mean, we
learn how to first
hold onto things.
And you know, when a parent says
let go and the baby cannot let
go, it's because in the brain,
it has not yet registered what
letting go means.
And then you see the
baby grow a little,
and they learn how to let go.
And then anything--
>> That's my problem.
>> Anything you give
them just drops down.
>> Yeah.
>> So I could say that my
life has been the fine art
of knowing what to hold
down and what to let go.
>> When to fold them.
Yeah.
>> That's right.
When to hold them and
when to fold them.
>> You've said, also, that
pain is a great teacher--
not that we want to celebrate
our painful experiences,
but to not perhaps
run away from them.
>> Well, in my own experience,
and working with thousands
of people, one thing that
I have really seen is how,
when we reach a point
of our own brokenness--
>> Which is different
for everybody.
>> For everybody, because
the threshold, the level,
the whole tolerance level of
pain differs from one person
to another.
But in that brokenness
is when you really
experience your vulnerability.
But you also experience,
then, the everlasting arms,
the sustaining force,
the life force within you
that rises to a new level.
It's a known fact that in
situations of big crisis
or drama, we suddenly produce
such strength that we never
thought that we were capable of.
So I could say that
every time that I
went to the end of my pain, I
discovered a new person in me.
And if I could--
if I look back, I mean,
it's a known fact,
a scientific fact that
all cells of our body
constantly regenerate.
>> Yeah.
>> The hardest thing to
regenerate is our thought
and feeling process, because
we get stuck with so many
of the old thoughts.
And it's like the
pain has always
broken a belief system,
a belief pattern,
and has promoted me
to the next level.
And everybody that I look or
work with, it's the same thing.
Now, the wonderful thing is that
in the evolutionary process,
we are learning
that we can learn,
discover with less and less
pain, and faster and faster.
>> Yeah, with self-awareness.
>> Yeah.
That's right.
>> Exactly.
>> That's the good news.
And everything that exists
today that makes us aware
helps that process.
>> You know, Liliane, pain, too,
to someone or even to someone
at a particular
time in their life,
what is painful to me today that
feels devastating would have
been nothing years ago.
It took a two-by-four years ago.
Today, it can be my own thought
process that brings me--
>> Absolutely.
>> I've got to move from
this place to the next.
This is not comfortable for me.
>> Exactly.
And we are learning how to make
better choices, definitely,
and how not to be stuck.
>> Speak to that, the stuck
energy you talk about.
What we have known as
addictions is a lot broader now.
>> Well, there's been so
much talk, so much awareness,
so many things
have been written.
Our entire health system is
now in a turmoil and changing.
Addictions have always been
looked at mainly in two
categories-- the substance
abuse addiction--
alcoholism and drugs.
And there is a
whole war going on.
We look at addictions truly
and genuinely as stuck energy
and as deep attachment
that simply stops growth.
Addictions are so much wider
than what we have originally
thought about the substance.
And I mean, drugs
and alcohol, they
are still the
smallest proportion
in our society of addictions,
although they are easily
identifiable.
They are the evident one.
But process addiction,
whether it be co-dependency,
workaholism, sex addiction,
relationship addiction,
gambling, spending--
compulsive spending--
computer addiction--
>> Obsessing, too--
>> Absolutely.
>> Being addicted to
obsessing over something.
>> You cannot be attached to
something as a belief that--
because attachments
are belief systems
that this is what is
going to remove my pain.
And I will go and use
this over and over,
hoping to kill that
emptiness, that pain,
or produce that euphoria.
>> This may seem like a simple
question, but how do we know,
sometimes, that we are in
that painful and stuck place?
Is it just when we're
medicating, like you're saying?
Or is there another way
for us to recognize that?
>> Well, what will happen
is that if you medicate long
enough, you are inevitably
going to start experiencing
the consequences of that.
And your life is
going to get stuck.
Your relationships are
going to start to reflect.
Your level of
creativity will go down.
energy will go down.
You see, we can't,
anymore, think in terms
of just mind, body, and spirit.
We have to think in
a greater sense--
mind, body, emotions, affect,
meaning all my belief systems,
the way that I relate
in all relationships.
All of those are spirit.
>> I love that.
>> You cannot separate
spirit from all of that.
>> Yeah.
>> And I believe that,
too, that Wayne Dyer, Dr.
Wayne Dyer gave the biggest
gift to the 20th century.
He defined who we are.
He defined that we are
spiritual beings having
human experiences.
And most of the time--
>> So everything is spirit.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah.
>> For all of us, what
happens is that we are first
and foremost and
only human beings.
And we glorify ourselves
in our humanness,
but which is also our biggest
addiction-- our goofiness.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, show me a
human and I'll show you,
every now and then, a
really cute, goofy person.
The truth about us
is a much bigger one.
We are spiritual beings.
Therefore, that energy,
that spiritual energy,
is in every aspect.
You can't treat, anymore, just
disease from the physical point
or from the biological point.
You have to consider
the whole thing.
>> Yeah.
>> One of the exciting things
in my work is that precisely we
are a holistic model
working with the affect,
meaning all the belief systems.
You know that original imprint?
>> Yeah.
>> We have, the old saying is,
we have been made and created
in the image and likeness of
God or our creator or a higher
power.
But ever since, humanity
has been paying the tribute
to God the other way, OK?
And we have been
imprinted by our families,
by our society,
education, religion,
with a fear-based paradigm.
>> We're going to need to
take a break right now,
but when we come back, let's
talk more specifically about
what we do look for in ourself
and how these addictions play
out in our own mind.
You are watching the
"World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft, speaking with
Liliane Desjardins of Pavillon
International.
Stay tuned.
We'll be right back.
>> Welcome back to
a "World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft, speaking
with Liliane Desjardins.
And right before the
break, we touched
on the addictions that--
there's a distinction between
the different addictions now.
>> Absolutely.
>> It's not just
drugs and alcohol.
>> Absolutely.
And we know that
there is, like I
said at the beginning,
substance addiction.
And then there are
process addictions.
Co-dependency-- I
mean, that attachment
to another person,
where my value comes
from another person, where my
whole being is being measured
from the outside by what others
approve, disapprove, and so
on for me.
Workaholism and all the sex
addiction, food addiction--
I mean, eating disorders.
These are the
process addictions.
You know, you live with them.
And you've got to learn
how to transform that.
But the research today,
and our own experience
of working with people,
has brought through it,
to our attention,
that underlying
all of the substance
and process addictions
are the core addictions.
And the core addictions--
the three core addictions
are power control,
security, and sensation.
Now, these are the paradigms
that are fear-based.
These are the paradigms
that have gone away
from the principles on
which you and me were
designed to originally operate.
>> As a spiritual being.
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> See, we are supposed to be
anchored in principles of truth
and love.
And when that is replaced and
when we become, progressively,
a society that is
fear-based, you're
going to have consequences.
Security addiction
is that deep belief,
deep paradigm in scarcity.
But it's the
not-enough syndrome,
in which you are not enough.
>> I'm not enough.
There's not enough of anything.
>> Of anything.
>> Yeah.
>> You never do enough.
You are simply somehow
at fault. And that's
when toxic shame comes in.
And that's when competition and
control and a craving for power
comes in.
>> Hazel Henderson calls that
working from the reptilian
brain.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
And it is, in many ways,
like we collectively
run on a programming and a disk
that was manufactured centuries
ago.
And we're still
using it in 1997.
And if you look around
us today, addictions
are not just a myth or a rumor.
The divorce rate, the
dismantling of our families,
the pain in the working
place, in our corporations--
>> From not coming from center.
>> From center, for not
coming from principles,
but coming from fear-based
paradigms that then produce
behaviors that are either, I
gotta win and you gotta lose,
or the victim syndrome, where I
am always the loser and you are
the winner.
>> Yeah.
>> Or we both lose, because we
go into destructive behaviors.
And we have become a society
of instant gratification,
because addictions stop growth.
And when you stop
growing emotionally,
I don't care how much
you progress in knowledge
and intellectual understanding.
They are not connected.
That's why we have to
treat the whole person.
Your mind needs to know
where your emotions are,
because if it does not, your
body is going to reflect it.
Behavior is at four levels--
thinking, feeling, doing,
and physiologically.
And whatever we don't deal with
consciously, our bodies deal.
And look--
>> Disease--
>> Absolutely.
>> --and pain.
>> Disease, pain,
disruption of relationships.
>> It's so easy, too, to blame
that on the outside world.
>> Absolutely.
>> But the new paradigm, what
I'm hearing is that we are
shifting.
>> We have to go back
to-- we are shifting.
Absolutely.
There is treatment
for addictions
when they are advanced.
But I truly believe that the
next millennium is calling
all of us to one thing--
more of the self awareness,
a return to the divine in us.
A return--
I love Larry Gatlin.
He's a great friend.
And he relates so well the story
that Emmett Fox talked about
in his book.
In Africa, they used to find
diamonds in the yellow clay.
And then one day, somebody
realized that if you dig deeper
and you go into the
blue clay, you're
going to find the Hope Diamond.
You're going to find
a Kimberley Diamond.
I really believe that we
are at an incredible time
in human development.
We are going within,
because we have tried,
especially on this continent,
we have tried everything
that we could from the outside
to fill that hole, that
emptiness that happens
when we are no more
anchored in principles.
>> You know, too, Liliane,
when you were talking about
the instant gratification,
it just occurred to me that
the attachments or
addictive behavior,
the stuck energy is that which
keeps us truly from inner
instant gratification.
>> That's right.
>> That we can't really get
instant gratification until we
look at that, when you
remove those blocks.
>> Exactly, because you
can't connect to the spirit.
>> What are some
of the ways that--
I know in your own treatment
and renewal center that you do--
what are some of the ways that
we can remove those blocks
and take a look at ourselves?
>> Well, first of all, if
we're talking about being
in a treatment and
renewal center, as I said,
we really work with all the
aspects of the human mind,
body, emotions, and affect.
And we go back and look
at what are our paradigms.
What is the belief system?
Because again, you can
work on behavior for years.
Unless you change the
paradigm, nothing changes.
We, in our own homes
today, can do one thing.
To which talk are you listening?
We all have our inner talk.
And one voice is going to tell
you, you're not good enough,
you don't measure up, and all
of these wonderful things.
And we listen to
our horror movies.
What do we do with a TV
program we don't like?
We change the channel.
But we never think of
changing our inner channel.
And unless we start
putting in affirmations,
positive self-talk, and
we start asking ourselves,
what is it that makes me
run, why am I doing this,
why am I in this relationship,
why am I acting the way I am--
>> I think, too, it's in that
instant that change is made.
And Wayne Dyer speaks to
this, too-- in that instant.
And it's usually
the hardest thing
you can think about
doing in that instant.
>> That's right.
>> The easiest thing is to
continue thinking the way you
have.
>> Exactly.
>> In that moment--
>> Thinking that somebody else
is responsible for the way you
feel and something else out
there is making it that way.
When you go in as
you are the problem,
you become the solution,
because in that moment,
you are no more in the past.
You are no more in the future.
You are in the now in your life.
That's the only place that
it happens, in the now.
And being aware in that now--
the mindfulness, the being
alive, awake, and present.
Medicators numb us.
Medicators keep us in the past.
Medicators project
us in the future.
>> And medicators
look like what?
Obviously they look
like drugs and alcohol.
>> Medicators can
look like anything.
I have seen people who have made
out of exercise the medicator
that replaced the food.
There is a balance in between.
Medicators can be work, other
people, success, power, money,
sex, drugs, alcohol.
>> Shopping.
That's right.
Internet.
Anything that becomes
the tool that you
use to deal with inner
turmoil, with inner pain,
with that nagging feeling
that you are not enough,
that you don't have
enough, that you don't have
enough control, that you don't
have enough power, that you
don't count, because the
conflict between security
addiction and power
addiction produces the pain.
And that's when the
sensation addiction sets in.
That means I can't deal with
this inside comfortably.
>> Can't breathe into it,
sit, and just be with it.
Yeah.
>> So I need--
>> Got to cover it up.
>> --to cover it up.
I need to kill the pain.
>> Thank you so much
for being with us today.
>> Really, good luck with
what you guys are doing here.
This is incredible that you
are bringing the good news
to the world.
>> Thanks.
Need that.
And thank you for joining
us on a "World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft.
I've been speaking
with Liliane Desjardins
of Pavillon International.
Thanks for joining us.